.TH HPCAT 1 "May 2025" "HPC Affinity Tracker" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
hpcat \- visualize resource affinity and topology on HPC systems
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hpcat
.RI [ OPTIONS ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B HPC Affinity Tracker (HPCAT)
provides a comprehensive visualization of system topology and resource affinities
tailored for High Performance Computing (HPC) applications. It displays relationships between
NUMA nodes, CPU cores, hardware threads, network interfaces, and GPU devices.

A key feature of this application is its use of dynamically linked modules to
retrieve information about system accelerators. This design allows a single binary
to run seamlessly across different cluster partitions (regardless of whether
accelerators are present) making it easier to deploy and maintain a consistent
user experience across the entire HPC system.

It reports runtime affinities for:

.TP
\fB* Fabric group ID\fR (cross-group communication cost; currently supports HPE Slingshot with Dragonfly topology)
.TP
\fB* MPI\fR tasks
.TP
\fB* OpenMP\fR threads (enabled when \fBOMP_NUM_THREADS\fP is set)
.TP
\fB* Accelerators\fR (AMD, Intel, or NVIDIA GPUs)
.TP
\fB* Network Interface Cards\fR (NICs; with Cray MPICH from 2 nodes onward)
.TP

The default output is a human-readable condensed table like the following:
.EX
╭──────────┬─────────┬──────┬─────────────────────────────────────┬────────────────────────┬──────────────────╮
│  FABRIC  │    HOST │  MPI │                 CPU                 │      ACCELERATORS      │     NETWORK      │
│ GROUP ID │  (NODE) │ RANK │ LOGICAL PROC │ PHYSICAL CORE │ NUMA │ ID │ PCIE ADDR. │ NUMA │ INTERFACE │ NUMA │
├──────────┼─────────┼──────┼──────────────┼───────────────┼──────┼────┼────────────┼──────┼───────────┼──────┤
│       35 │ node031 │      │              │               │      │    │            │      │           │      │
│          │         │    0 │          1-7 │           1-7 │    0 │  4 │     [0:d1] │    0 │      cxi2 │    0 │
│          │         │    1 │         9-15 │          9-15 │    0 │  5 │     [0:d6] │    0 │      cxi2 │    0 │
│          │         │    2 │        17-23 │         17-23 │    1 │  2 │     [0:c9] │    1 │      cxi1 │    1 │
│          │         │    3 │        25-31 │         25-31 │    1 │  3 │     [0:ce] │    1 │      cxi1 │    1 │
├──────────┼─────────┼──────┼──────────────┼───────────────┼──────┼────┼────────────┼──────┼───────────┼──────┤
│       35 │ node032 │      │              │               │      │    │            │      │           │      │
│          │         │    4 │          1-7 │           1-7 │    0 │  4 │     [0:d1] │    0 │      cxi2 │    0 │
│          │         │    5 │         9-15 │          9-15 │    0 │  5 │     [0:d6] │    0 │      cxi2 │    0 │
│          │         │    6 │        17-23 │         17-23 │    1 │  2 │     [0:c9] │    1 │      cxi1 │    1 │
│          │         │    7 │        25-31 │         25-31 │    1 │  3 │     [0:ce] │    1 │      cxi1 │    1 │
╰──────────┴─────────┴──────┴──────────────┴───────────────┴──────┴────┴────────────┴──────┴───────────┴──────╯
.EE

.TP
YAML format is also available.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -c ", " --enable-color-dark
Use color output optimized for dark terminal backgrounds.
.TP
.BR --enable-color-light
Use color output optimized for light terminal backgrounds.
.TP
.BR --disable-accel
Disable GPU affinity display.
.TP
.BR --disable-fabric
Disable fabric group ID display.
.TP
.BR --disable-nic
Disable network interface affinity display.
.TP
.BR --disable-omp
Disable OpenMP thread affinity display.
.TP
.BR --enable-omp
Enable OpenMP thread affinity display.
.TP
.BR --no-banner
Suppress header and footer in the output.
.TP
.BR -v ", " --verbose
Enable verbose output.
.TP
.BR -y ", " --yaml
Enable YAML output format.
.TP
.BR -? ", " --help
Display help message.
.TP
.BR --usage
Show short usage message.
.TP
.BR -V ", " --version
Display program version.

.SH USAGE
To run
.B HPCAT
in an HPC environment, it should be launched similarly to your target application to preserve scheduling and binding context.

.TP
For example, in Slurm:

.EX
SLURM_ARGS="-N 2 -n 16 -c 16 --hint=nomultithread"
srun $SLURM_ARGS hpcat
srun $SLURM_ARGS <application>
.EE

.SH ENVIRONMENT
When using Slingshot with Cray MPICH, setting the environment variable
.B MPICH_OFI_NIC_POLICY
to
.B GPU
enables the tool to emulate NIC affinity to match GPU NUMA affinity. This Cray MPICH feature requires certain
libraries that are not linked during compilation to maintain modularity.

.SH SCALABILITY
.B HPCAT
is lightweight and scales efficiently. Most time is spent initializing system libraries and rendering output. The tool has been tested on systems with over 2,000 MPI ranks across 256 nodes.

.SH AUTHOR
Jean-Yves Vet (HPE), initial manual page by Kurt Lust (LUMI consortium)

.SH SEE ALSO
hwloc(1), mpirun(1), srun(1)

.SH BUGS
Report issues at:
https://github.com/HewlettPackard/hpcat/issues
